Finding Broken Linux Configuration Specifications
by Statically Analyzing the Kconfig Language
Jeho Oh∗

Necip Fazıl Yıldıran∗

University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX, USA
jeho.oh@utexas.edu

University of Central Florida
Orlando, FL, USA
yildiran@knights.ucf.edu

Julian Braha

Paul Gazzillo

University of Central Florida
Orlando, FL, USA
julianbraha@knights.ucf.edu

University of Central Florida
Orlando, FL, USA
paul.gazzillo@ucf.edu

ABSTRACT

ACM Reference Format:
Jeho Oh, Necip Fazıl Yıldıran, Julian Braha, and Paul Gazzillo. 2021. Finding Broken Linux Configuration Specifications by Statically Analyzing the
Kconfig Language. In Proceedings of the 29th ACM Joint European Software
Engineering Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering (ESEC/FSE ’21), August 23ś28, 2021, Athens, Greece. ACM, New York,
NY, USA, 13 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3468264.3468578

Highly-configurable software underpins much of our computing
infrastructure. It enables extensive reuse, but opens the door to broken configuration specifications. The configuration specification
language, Kconfig, is designed to prevent invalid configurations
of the Linux kernel from being built. However, the astronomical
size of the configuration space for Linux makes finding specification bugs difficult by hand or with random testing. In this paper,
we introduce a software model checking framework for building
Kconfig static analysis tools. We develop a formal semantics of
the Kconfig language and implement the semantics in a symbolic
evaluator called kclause that models Kconfig behavior as logical formulas. We then design and implement a bug finder, called
kismet, that takes kclause models and leverages automated theorem proving to find unmet dependency bugs. kismet is evaluated
for its precision, performance, and impact on kernel development
for a recent version of Linux, which has over 140,000 lines of Kconfig across 28 architecture-specific specifications. Our evaluation
finds 781 bugs (151 when considering sharing among Kconfig specifications) with 100% precision, spending between 37 and 90 minutes
for each Kconfig specification, although it misses some bugs due to
underapproximation. Compared to random testing, kismet finds
substantially more true positive bugs in a fraction of the time.

1

CCS CONCEPTS
· Software and its engineering → Software configuration management and version control systems; Automated static analysis; Software testing and debugging.

KEYWORDS
software configuration, Kconfig, formal verification, static analysis
∗ Co-first authors.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
ESEC/FSE ’21, August 23ś28, 2021, Athens, Greece
© 2021 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-8562-6/21/08. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3468264.3468578

893

INTRODUCTION

Highly-configurable software product lines underpin much of our
computing infrastructure, because configurability enables reuse
without having to reprogram the software for new devices or
applications. The Linux kernel is one such example of highlyconfigurable software that is used in billions of computing devices.
With over 15,000 configuration options controlling everything from
drivers, architecture, memory management, and more, there are
over 215,000 combinations, if only considering Boolean options. This
extreme configurability makes its widespread use possible, but also
opens the door to invalid configurations, which produce broken
variations of the software.
To mitigate the chance of misconfiguration, developers provide
configuration specifications, which define the intended combinations
of configuration options. These specifications may be as simple as
a text file describing configuration instructions, or as sophisticated
as a machine-readable specification enforced at build time. These
specifications, if only implicitly, define a software product line’s
feature model, i.e., the legal configurations of the software. In Linux
and other systems software, such as BusyBox and coreboot, developers use the Kconfig language to specify configuration options, as
well as their dependencies.
While Linux is effectively a software product line, its specification language, Kconfig, is unlike typical feature modeling languages [47]. Kconfig has complex semantics and additional language features, such as invisible variables, automated option selection, and user-interface support. With over 140,000 lines of Kconfig
specifications in the Linux kernel, its complex behavior makes
maintenance challenging. One example is the common pitfall highlighted in Kconfig’s manual [28], the unmet dependency bug. These
bugs lead to illegal configurations when developers unwittingly
mix conflicting constructs in dependency specifications. With thousands of potentially vulnerable constructs and an ever-changing

ESEC/FSE ’21, August 23–28, 2021, Athens, Greece

Jeho Oh, Necip Fazıl Yıldıran, Julian Braha, and Paul Gazzillo

specification, finding such bugs by hand is a practically impossible
task.
Existing work on the analysis of Kconfig is focused on extracting
a feature model, rather than checking for Kconfig bugs. Having
a Linux feature model has been useful for applications outside of
Kconfig, including measuring feature model hierarchies [10, 44, 45],
supporting variability-aware analysis of C [11, 18, 20, 24, 26, 27, 31,
51, 56, 58], and dead code elimination [52, 53]. However, these tools
make assumptions about Kconfig semantics that, while appropriate
for their respective applications, make them less amenable to bug
finding. For instance, KconfigReader explicitly omits modeling the
language semantics that lead to unmet dependencies, leaving a
checker as a separate problem [25, 30]. The other tools do the
same and have less support for Kconfig semantics, omitting some
parts of the Linux feature model altogether [16, 45]. Moreover, by
focusing on feature modeling, prior tools bake in decisions about
the analysis domain, i.e., a feature model, which limits the feasibility
of repurposing the work for Kconfig bug finding and other source
level tools.
In this paper, we introduce a software model checking framework
for building Kconfig static analysis tools. Inspired by model checking frameworks for program code [1], we base our static analysis on
our newly-developed formal semantics of the Kconfig language and
leverage automated theorem proving to model Kconfig behavior
and find bugs. Of existing descriptions of Kconfig semantics, all but
one are either informal or example-based [15, 16] which, having
no formalization, are not amenable to automated reasoning. The
one prior formal semantics uses an idealized Kconfig syntax rather
than Kconfig’s actual grammar, is missing language behavior (including that leading to unmet dependencies), and uses an abstract
domain designed for feature modeling [43]. In contrast, we develop
a formal semantics of the concrete behavior of Kconfig when it
checks a configuration file’s validity. We define our semantics over
the syntax derived from Kconfig’s actual implementation, which
contains a bison grammar specification.
This approach to Kconfig semantics has three key benefits over
prior efforts. First, it is formal, making it possible to use automated
reasoning tools. Second, it is concrete, which decouples the description of Kconfig semantics from any particular analysis objective.
This leaves decisions about how to abstract Kconfig behavior to
specific applications and should reduce future effort to design new
Kconfig analyses. Third, it simplifies modeling Kconfig since, as
we show, we can methodically derive an abstraction of Kconfig
behavior from this concrete semantics.
To demonstrate the utility of our approach, we design and implement an analysis that finds the unmet dependency bugs highlighted
in Kconfig’s manual and is, to our knowledge, the first static analysis for finding such bugs. We first define the bug as a formal
property in terms of the semantics, then show how a checker can
be methodically derived from the semantics. We underapproximate
non-Boolean options and use aggressive optimization to yield a
bug-finder that is both fast and very precise. Moreover, it can also
automatically localize and generate test cases for the unmet dependency bugs it finds. The trade-off is decreased recall due to false
negatives, although we show that these are less common due to the
rarity of non-Boolean options.

We implement the bug-finder and evaluate it on a recent version
of the Linux kernel source, which contains over 140,000 lines of
Kconfig describing 28 architecture-specific Kconfig specifications.
Our results show that our bug finding is both precise and fast.
The bug-finder finds 781 alarms (151 when considering sharing
among Kconfig specifications) over all Linux kernel architectures’
Kconfig specifications, all of which are verified true positives, for a
precision of 100%. While such precision might be unusually high
for a programming language analyzer, the Kconfig language has no
iteration or recursion that would require overapproximation. With
our optimizations, our bug finder takes an average of 40 minutes
for one Kconfig specification, checking over 10,000 constructs.
While we are still in the process of reporting all bugs found
by our tool, Linux maintainers have so far already confirmed 38
of our reports and committed 15 of our patches into the mainline
Linux kernel repository, demonstrating the utility of our tooling.
Committing patches is a manual process, requiring discussion with
kernel maintainers, so investigating, reporting, and submitting
patches for the alarms is ongoing.
Since, to our knowledge, no other static bug finder for unmet
dependencies exists, we compare to Kconfig’s built-in randconfig
tool, the de facto standard random configuration testing tool used
by Linux maintainers and the Intel 0-day test service [5]. Given the
same amount of time to find bugs, randconfig yields only 98 alarms
compared to our tool’s 781. Even letting random testing run for over
four days for each Kconfig specification, 135x longer than our tool’s
total time, the testing approach still only finds 175 bugs, far fewer
than our tool. The random testing approach did find eight bugs
missed by our tool, reflecting the tradeoff in performance gained
by underapproximation. Even with this limitation, our tool finds
many more bugs while taking far less time, a useful complement to
testing.
In summary, this paper makes the following contributions:
• A formal semantics of Kconfig’s concrete behavior (Section 3).
• An efficient design of a bug-finder and localizer for unmet
dependency bugs (Section 4).
• An implementation of the bug finder, along with reusable
components for creating Kconfig analyzers (Section 5).
• An experimental evaluation of the bug finder’s precision,
performance, and impact (Section 6).

2

OVERVIEW

In this section we introduce the Kconfig language, illustrate an
unmet dependency bug, and summarize how our formal semantics
enables the design of a static analysis to find such bugs.

2.1

Introduction to the Kconfig Language

Figure 1 is a simplified snippet of Kconfig from Linux v5.4.4. Configuration options are defined with the config construct (lines 1,
7, and 12). Inside each config declaration is a block of constructs
that define the option’s type (e.g. Boolean), constraints on its use,
and text used by Kconfig to populate a user interface.
Lines 2, 8, and 13 are the type declarations. A bool option (line 8)
has two possible settings, y or n. y means the feature is on and compiled into the kernel, and n means the feature is off and omitted

894

Finding Broken Linux Configuration Specifications by Statically Analyzing the Kconfig Language

ESEC/FSE ’21, August 23–28, 2021, Athens, Greece

An Unmet Dependency Bug in the Wild. Figure 1 has an unmet dependency bug found by our automated analysis. All three of the configuration options defined in this example control specific C compilation units that are only built into the kernel when the options are
enabled. IIO_BUFFER_CB controls industrialio-buffer-cb.o and
IIO_BUFFER control industrialio-buffer.o.
industrialio-buffer-cb.o calls functions that are defined in
industrialio-buffer.o, so the former cannot be built without
the latter, otherwise there would be a build error. The developers
capture this build dependency with a direct dependency in the
definition of the IIO_BUFFER_CB option (line 15). This constraint,
by itself, would prevent a user from giving a configuration that
leads to the build error.
The select IIO_BUFFER_CB construct on line 5, however, can
override this direct dependency under certain conditions. Specifically, if a user (or another select) enables TOUCHSCREEN_ADC, the
select automatically force-enables IIO_BUFFER_CB. Kconfig permits such a configuration to proceed to build, albeit with a warning.
Still, the build will fail, and the user will have to manually correct
their configuration file in order to avoid the unmet dependency.
While the Kconfig documentation warns of select’s pitfalls and
recommends not using it to override dependencies, it is difficult
to check by hand whether any of its 17,000+ uses have an unmet
dependency bug.

config TOUCHSCREEN_ADC
tristate
3
prompt "Generic ADC based touchscreen"
4
depends on IIO && INPUT_TOUCHSCREEN
5
select IIO_BUFFER_CB
1

2

6

config IIO_BUFFER
bool
9
prompt "Enable buffer support within IIO"
10
depends on IIO
7

8

11

config IIO_BUFFER_CB
tristate
14
prompt "IIO callback buffer"
15
depends on IIO && IIO_BUFFER
12

13

Figure 1: An example Kconfig specification that allows an
unmet dependency violation and leads to a build error.
Adapted from Linux source: drivers/input/touchscreen/Kconfig, drivers/iio/Kconfig, and drivers/iio/buffer/Kconfig.

2.2

from the kernel. A tristate option (lines 2 and 13) adds an additional setting, m. m is like y except that the build system compiles
a loadable kernel module instead of linking to the main kernel
binary [28].
tristate and bool are the most common configuration options,
representing more than 95% of options in the Linux Kconfig specifications. The other possible types are string for strings, int for
decimal integers, and hex for hexadecimal numbers.
Constraints on options are defined using depends on (lines 4,
10, and 15) and select (line 5), but the Kconfig language prohibits
circular dependencies. depends on defines a direct dependency,
which provides requirements that should hold before the option can
be enabled. The dependency is expressed with a Boolean expression
of other options. For instance, line 4 means that TOUCHSCREEN_ADC
may not be enabled unless IIO && INPUT_TOUCHSCREEN is true,
i.e., when both IIO and INPUT_TOUCHSCREEN are also enabled.
A reverse dependency, given by the select construct, inverts the
dependency relationship by forcing the target of the select to be enabled. For instance, line 5 means that whenever TOUCHSCREEN_ADC
is enabled, IIO_BUFFER_CB is forced to be enabled. A reverse dependency can only enable another option, not disable it, and only
applies to bool or tristate options. Kconfig permits reverse dependencies to override direct dependencies, which can lead to unmet
dependency bugs.
Options with a prompt are visible options that a user may enable.
The prompt construct defines the prompt string for use in a user
interface (lines 3, 9, and 14). Non-visible options, i.e., those with no
prompt construct, can only be set by a select construct or take a
specification-defined default value (not shown in this example). The
visibility of an option affects the behavior of a config construct in
subtle ways, which we describe in the formal semantics of Kconfig.

An Unmet Dependencies Bug Finder

We create a formal model of the unmet dependency bug according
to the semantics of Kconfig. First, we model the space of valid Kconfig configurations in formal logic automatically with our symbolic
evaluator kclause. Next, kismet generates verification conditions
to prove the absence of an unmet dependency for each select
construct in the Kconfig specification. Not all reverse dependencies can cause unmet dependencies, so kismet needs to consider
constraints from all configuration options to rule out infeasible
ones. The resulting verification conditions are discharged to the
Z3 SMT solver [13]. When an unmet dependency cannot be ruled
out, kismet raises an alarm. It then switches to test case generation, converting any counterexamples to Linux configuration files.
kismet uses these tests on Kconfig and the build system to expose
real bugs.
To see how kclause models dependencies, take Figure 1’s definition of TOUCHSCREEN_ADC (line 1). Since it has no reverse dependencies, it can only be enabled when its direct dependencies hold, i.e.,
enabling TOUCHSCREEN_ADC implies IIO and INPUT_TOUCHSCREEN
are also both enabled:
TOUCHSCREEN_ADC → IIO ∧ INPUT_TOUCHSCREEN

When an option has reverse dependencies, its direct dependencies
do not have to hold if its reverse dependencies already do. For
instance, enabling IIO_BUFFER_CB (line 12) implies that its direct
or reverse dependencies hold:
IIO_BUFFER_CB →(IIO ∧ IIO_BUFFER
∨ TOUCHSCREEN_ADC)

An unmet dependency happens when an option’s reverse dependencies hold but its direct dependencies do not. For instance, an
unmet dependency happens when TOUCHSCREEN_ADC force-enables

895

ESEC/FSE ’21, August 23–28, 2021, Athens, Greece

kconfig
statement
config
choice
type
constrnts
prompt
default
depends
select
expr
val

::=
::=
::=
::=
::=
::=
::=
::=
::=
::=
::=
::=

Jeho Oh, Necip Fazıl Yıldıran, Julian Braha, and Paul Gazzillo

statement+
config | choice
config symbol type constrnts select*
choice type constrnts config+ endchoice
bool | tristate
prompt depends+ default+
prompt word if expr
default val if expr
depends on expr
select symbol if expr
expr && expr | expr || expr | ! expr | symbol
y|n

Figure 3a defines the semantic valuation function S for statements. S functions take an immutable configuration file 𝜎 as input
and return whether the configuration is valid or invalid, i.e.,
buildable or not. S1 evaluates a Kconfig specification’s list of statements by checking whether all statements are valid according to
the input.
S2 is the valuation function for config statements. The number
of cases reflects the complexities of Kconfig’s validity checking.
The first covers reverse dependencies, using the valuation function
R, which searches the entire kconfig file. (In practice, the Kconfig
implementation memoizes reverse dependencies during parsing to
avoid repeatedly traversing the syntax tree.) If a reverse dependency
holds, that means the option must be enabled, i.e., 𝜎 (𝑠𝑦𝑚) = 𝑦,
otherwise the configuration file does not match the specification.
The second case of S2 handles a direct dependency when the
reverse dependency does not hold. In this case, an option is valid
regardless of its setting, because a user is free to enable or disable it.
The third case covers non-visible configuration options, which have
no prompt, so the option’s value must match the specified default.
The fourth case covers when none of the option’s dependencies
hold. Lastly, if none of these conditions are met, the configuration
file is not valid.
Dependencies for non-Boolean types (string, int, and hex) behave
similarly to bool and tristate, but there are additional constraints
and expressions such as range and inequalities. The full semantics
describes these differences [40].

Figure 2: Formal syntax of a core fragment of Kconfig.

IIO_BUFFER_CB even though IIO_BUFFER_CB’s direct dependencies are infeasible. This unmet dependency can be formalized as
follows:
TOUCHSCREEN_ADC ∧ (IIO ∧ INPUT_TOUCHSCREEN)
∧ IIO_BUFFER_CB ∧ ¬ (IIO ∧ IIO_BUFFER)

kismet tries to prove the negation of this condition, since it verifies
the absence of unmet dependencies. If the proof fails, kismet raises
an alarm and switches to test case generation.

3

THE SEMANTICS OF KCONFIG
3.2

The Kconfig language is a declarative configuration specification
language. At its core, Kconfig takes a configuration file, which is
a mapping from configuration options to their concrete values,
and determines whether the configuration file is valid according
to the developer’s specifications. Developers use Kconfig language
constructs to define configuration options, declaring their names,
types, and any dependencies they have on other configuration
options. Kconfig also supports user interfaces, and the language
has additional constructs, such as help, to specify text elements of
the interface. These do not affect the buildability of configuration
files and act as comments.
We developed this formal semantics by studying the Kconfig
manual, Kconfig’s source code, as well as informal descriptions and
examples from prior work [15, 16]. To check the fidelity of the semantics, we used new and existing benchmarks [15, 16], generated
random configuration files fed to Kconfig as input, and evaluated
this paper’s bug-finder, which requires a correct semantics for its
analysis to be precise. Given the size of the semantics, having dozens
of rules and still more syntactic sugar rules, we highlight a core
fragment of the language here, and document the remaining rules
in an openly-archived formal semantics [40].

3.1

Reverse Dependencies

To find any reverse dependencies for an option, Kconfig needs to
search the entire specification for a select that can enable the
option. This is partly why tracking down unmet dependencies is
so difficult.
Figure 3b defines the valuation function R for reverse dependencies. It takes both the configuration file 𝜎 and a symbol name 𝑠 and
returns a Boolean value: true if that symbol is selected by some
option or false if not. R1 ’s disjunction reflects the need for only
one select to force-enable an option.
R2 checks to see if an option is enabled and its dependencies
are met, then calls R3 to evaluate any select constructs. R3 checks
whether there is a select for the input symbol 𝑠. R4 checks whether
any configuration option within a choice block selects symbol 𝑠.
Options other than tristate and bool cannot be the selector
or selectee of a reverse dependency.

3.3

Choice Constructs

A choice construct defines a mutually-exclusive set of configuration options. Choices are useful in configuration specifications,
because expressing them with Boolean logic alone is verbose. Figure 4 is an example of a choice from the Linux kernel that allows
only one of several compression algorithms for a file system to
be enabled. A choice block starts with a choice keyword (line 1)
and ends with an endchoice (line 10). It contains a list of configuration options which, besides the mutual-exclusion rule, behave
mostly like any other options, except that they cannot have reverse
dependencies or default values.

Configuration Declarations

Figure 2 shows the syntax of a core fragment of the Kconfig language for bool configuration options. A kconfig file contains a list
of statements, which are either a configuration option declaration
or a choice construct. A configuration option, config, has a type, constraints for direct dependencies, and zero or more select constructs
for reverse dependencies.

896

Finding Broken Linux Configuration Specifications by Statically Analyzing the Kconfig Language

(S2 )

(S3 )

Δ

(

valid
invalid

Ó
if statement𝑖 ∈kconfig (S[[statement𝑖 ]]𝜎 = valid)
otherwise

Δ


valid





valid





 valid

if (𝜎 (𝑠𝑦𝑚) = y) ∧ R[[kconfig]] (𝜎, 𝑠𝑦𝑚)
if E[[depends+]]𝜎 ∧ E[[prompt ]]𝜎 ∧ ¬ R[[kconfig]] (𝜎, 𝑠𝑦𝑚)
if ( (𝜎 (𝑠𝑦𝑚) = y) ∧ E[[default+]]𝜎 ∨ (𝜎 (𝑠𝑦𝑚) = n) ∧ ¬E[[default+]]𝜎)
∧ E[[depends+]]𝜎 ∧ ¬E[[prompt ]]𝜎 ∧ ¬ R[[kconfig]] (𝜎, 𝑠𝑦𝑚)
if (𝜎 (𝑠𝑦𝑚) = n) ∧ ¬E[[depends+]]𝜎 ∧ ¬ R[[kconfig]] (𝜎, 𝑠𝑦𝑚)

S[[kconfig]]𝜎 =

(S1 )

ESEC/FSE ’21, August 23–28, 2021, Athens, Greece

S[[config 𝑠𝑦𝑚 bool constrnts select*]]𝜎 =







valid



 invalid



valid







Δ 
S[[choice bool constrnts config+ end]]𝜎 = valid




valid



 invalid


otherwise
if (Enabled[[config+]]𝜎 = 1) ∧ (S[[config+]]𝜎 = valid)
∧ E[[depends+]]𝜎 ∧ E[[prompt ]]𝜎
if (Enabled[[config+]]𝜎 = 0) ∧ ¬(E[[depends+]]𝜎 ∧ E[[prompt ]]𝜎)
Ó
if (Enabled[[config+]]𝜎 = 0) ∧ constrnts𝑖 ∈config+ (¬E[[constrnts𝑖 ]]𝜎)
otherwise

(a) Direct dependency rules.
Δ

R[[kconfig]] (𝜎, 𝑠) =

(R1 )

Ü

R[[statement𝑖 ]] (𝜎, 𝑠)

statement𝑖 ∈kconfig

(R2 )

(R3 )

(R4 )

Δ

R[[config 𝑠𝑦𝑚 bool constrnts select*]] (𝜎, 𝑠) =

(

R[[select*]] (𝜎, 𝑠)
false

if (𝜎 (𝑠𝑦𝑚) = y) ∧ E[[depends+]]𝜎
otherwise



true
if (sym = 𝑠) ∧ E[[expr]]𝜎


Δ 
R[[select sym if expr select*]] (𝜎, 𝑠) = R[[select*]] (𝜎, 𝑠) if select* ≠ ∅


 false
otherwise

(
R[[config+]]
(𝜎,
𝑠)
if E[[depends+]]𝜎 ∧ E[[prompt ]]𝜎
Δ
R[[choice bool constrnts config+ end]] (𝜎, 𝑠) =
false
otherwise
(b) Reverse dependency rules.
Δ

E[[prompt word if expr ]]𝜎 = E[[expr]]𝜎
Û
Δ
E[[depends+]]𝜎 =
(E[[expr𝑖 ]]𝜎)

(E1 )
Σ : Symbols → {y, n}

(E2 )

S : Statements → (Σ → {valid, invalid})

expr𝑖 ∈ depends+

R : Statements → (Σ × Symbols → {true, false})
E : Constraints → (Σ → {true, false})

(c) Types for input (Σ) and the valuation functions.
Õ
Δ
(1)
Enabled[[config+]]𝜎 =

sym𝑖 ∈config+
𝜎 (sym𝑖 ) =𝑦

(E3 )

(E4 )



 val = y
E[[default val if expr default*]]𝜎 = E[[default*]]𝜎


 false


Δ 

if E[[expr]]𝜎
if default* ≠ ∅
otherwise

Δ

E[[expr1 && expr2 ]]𝜎 = E[[expr1 ]]𝜎 ∧ E[[expr2 ]]𝜎
Δ

E[[expr1 || expr2 ]]𝜎 = E[[expr1 ]]𝜎 ∨ E[[expr2 ]]𝜎

(E5 )

Δ

E[[ ! expr]]𝜎 = ¬E[[expr]]𝜎

(E6 )

Δ

E[[𝑠𝑦𝑚]]𝜎 = (𝜎 (𝑠𝑦𝑚) = 𝑦)

(E7 )

(d) Counting how many config options are enabled.
(e) Expression evaluation rules.

Figure 3: Formal semantics of a core fragment of Kconfig.

897

ESEC/FSE ’21, August 23–28, 2021, Athens, Greece

Jeho Oh, Necip Fazıl Yıldıran, Julian Braha, and Paul Gazzillo

config X
select A if 𝐷𝑋
3
𝐾𝑋 // other constraints for X

choice
prompt "Decompressor parallelisation options"
3
depends on SQUASHFS
4 config SQUASHFS_DECOMP_SINGLE
5
bool "Single threaded compression"
6 config SQUASHFS_DECOMP_MULTI
7
bool "Use multiple decompressors"
8 config SQUASHFS_DECOMP_MULTI_PERCPU
9
bool "Use percpu multiple decompressors"
10 endchoice

1

1
2

2

4

config A
depends on 𝐷𝐴
7
𝐾𝐴 // other constraints for A
8 𝐾other // constraints from other configuration options
5

6

Figure 5: Components of an unmet dependency condition.

Figure 4: An example of a choice construct.

Kconfig has limited metaprogramming facilities via preprocessor
constructs for file inclusion and macro expansion [2], which we
do not model. Our implementation runs the preprocessor before
symbolic evaluation to ensure that all files are included and macros
are expanded.

The S3 function in Figure 3a describes the choice block’s semantics. The first case covers the mutual exclusion property, requiring
that only one of the configuration options is enabled. This condition
also recursively checks that all the nested configs’ dependencies
are valid.
Choice constructs also have their own direct dependencies, so
Kconfig permits no options to be enabled when the choice dependencies are not met. The second case of S3 covers this situation. The
third case covers the situation when none of the nested config options’ dependencies are met, in which case Kconfig also permits the
choice to have no options enabled. choice constructs can also take
the optional keyword to allow for no options to be enabled even if
its direct dependencies are met. The rules are slightly different from
a regular choice, and we present them in the full semantics [40].
The choice statement described above has bool type. The only
other type a choice can take is tristate, in which case its behavior
is the same as bool, except that more than one choice may be set
to m.

3.4

4

Our bug-finder, called kismet works by generating a formula for
each select describing the configurations under which it triggers
an unmet dependency bug. This requires both syntax analysis, to
identify select constructs, as well as semantic analysis, to construct a formal model of the bug automatically. kismet discharges
the formal conditions to an SMT solver to check satisfiability. The
Kconfig language allows developers to define constraints using
symbolic Boolean formulas. Since our goal is to analyze all solutions to these constraints simultaneously, the analysis problem is
at least as hard as Boolean satisfiability in general. The main challenge to designing kismet is ensuring scalability while preserving
enough precision to identify the exact constructs causing the unmet
dependency alarm.

Constraint Expressions

Figure 3e defines rules for evaluating constraint expressions, which
return a Boolean true or false. E1 , E2 , and E3 are the prompt,
depends on, and default constructs, respectively. Each is a carrier
for a logical expression, and it is their interaction with config and
choice that gives them distinct meaning. The rest of the rules are
typical Boolean operators (E4 śE7 ).

3.5

DESIGNING THE BUG FINDER

4.1

Identifying Select Constructs

The first challenge for kismet is to identify select constructs in
the Kconfig specifications. Walking over each config construct
syntactically, it records all pairs of options involved in a select
operation. For instance, in Figure 1, kismet identifies the pair
(TOUCHSCREEN_ADC, IIO_BUFFER_CB) which contains the selector
and selectee, respectively. In order to verify whether the select
is free from an unmet dependency bug, kismet needs to account
for all of the dependencies that constrain both the selector and the
selectee.
The schematic in Figure 5 highlights what conditions kismet
uses from the Kconfig specification to construct a verification condition. The configuration option X (line 1) selects A (line 5) with
the select construct on line 2. The select construct itself is constrained by some if dependency, captured by a logical formula
𝐷𝑋 (line 2). Additionally, X has its own dependencies 𝐾𝑋 controlling when it can be enabled (line 3). A’s direct dependencies are
𝐷𝐴 (line 6), while 𝐾𝐴 (line 7) represents any prompt or default
constraints. 𝐾other represents the constraints from all other configuration options.

Syntactic Sugar

Kconfig has three additional statements that can be desugared to
config and choice: if, menu, and menuconfig. Unlike the controlflow construct in programming languages, Kconfig’s if is just syntactic sugar for adding constraints in bulk to its nested statements.
The menu statement behaves like an if block, but also adds text
to the user interface. menuconfig is a combination of config and
menu. The full semantics [40] contains the desugaring rules for
these.
The Kconfig language also has a great deal of flexibility in its
syntax. Most of the behavior of a Kconfig specification is insensitive
to the ordering of options and constraints. Therefore, our syntax
defines ordering on constraints to reduce the number of syntactic
sugars rules needed.

898

Finding Broken Linux Configuration Specifications by Statically Analyzing the Kconfig Language

4.2

Modeling Unmet Dependency Bugs

describes a valid configuration given an input configuration file. For
each Kconfig syntactic construct in the specification under analysis,
our bug finder automatically constructs a symbolic formula 𝜙𝑖 corresponding to its valuation function from the semantics in Figure 3.
The formula is the disjunction of each condition leading to a valid
result. For instance, a config statement, defined by semantic rule
S2 in Figure 3, has four valid cases. kclause constructs 𝜙 config
as a disjunction of each of these case conditions, where 𝐶 is the
symbolic value of the option:

X’s select construct only causes an unmet dependency if the select
overrides A’s direct dependencies, i.e., when A’s dependencies are
unsatisfied. If we just consider the constraints of the selector and
the selectee, the formula for unmet dependency is as follows:
(1)

𝜙 unmet = 𝑋 ∧ 𝐷𝑋 ∧ 𝐾𝑋

(2)

∧ 𝐴 ∧ ¬(𝐷𝐴 ∧ 𝐾𝐴 )

𝜙 unmet means the following: the selector option X is enabled and its
select and other constraints 𝐷𝑋 ∧ 𝐾𝑋 are met (subexpression 1);
and the selectee option A is enabled while its dependencies 𝐷𝐴 ∧ 𝐾𝐴
are not met (subexpression 2).
𝜙 unmet is an overapproximation, however, because it only accounts for the constraints from two configuration options, the
selector and selectee. Constraints from other configuration options
(𝐾other ) can make 𝜙 unmet unsatisfiable. Without accounting for
those, we can expect more false positive alarms. A precise condition would contain these constraints as well:

𝜙 config = (𝐶 ∧ 𝜙 reverse )
∨ (𝜙 depends ∧ 𝜙 prompt ∧ ¬𝜙 reverse )
∨ ( (𝐶 ∧ 𝜙 default ∨ ¬𝐶 ∧ ¬𝜙 default )
∧ 𝜙 depends ∧ ¬𝜙 prompt ∧ ¬𝜙 reverse )
∨ (¬𝐶 ∧ ¬𝜙 depends ∧ ¬𝜙 reverse )

Each of the four disjunctive terms corresponds to each of the four
valid conditions from S2 . Accesses to the concrete configuration
option value 𝜎 (𝑠𝑦𝑚) are replaced with a symbolic Boolean value
𝐶. Calls to other valuation functions are replaced with the symbolic formulas for that syntax, e.g., 𝜙 depends for the depends on
construct.
For the configuration option IIO_BUFFER_CB in Figure 1, 𝜙 config
is constructed from the following symbolic formulas:

𝜙 unmet (precise) = 𝜙 unmet ∧ 𝐾other
Optimizing the bug-finder. The Linux Kconfig specification has
thousands of configuration options, so 𝜙 unmet (precise) is a substantially more expensive formula to solve; it has the constraints from
thousands of configuration options instead of just the two in 𝜙 unmet .
To make solving more efficient, we use two techniques. First, if
a selectee option has no direct dependencies, then an unmet dependency bug is not possible. Second, we first check the 𝜙 unmet
condition and only check 𝜙 unmet (precise) if the first check is satisfiable. This optimization is safe, because if 𝜙 unmet is unsatisfiable, we
know that 𝜙 unmet (precise) is also unsatisfiable, i.e. ¬𝜙 unmet entails
¬𝜙 unmet (precise) :
𝜙 unmet → 𝜙 unmet

tautology

𝜙 unmet ∧ 𝐾other → 𝜙 unmet

strengthening

𝜙 unmet (precise) → 𝜙 unmet
¬𝜙 unmet → ¬𝜙 unmet (precise)

𝐶 = IIO_BUFFER_CB
𝜙 reverse = TOUCHSCREEN_ADC ∧ IIO ∧ INPUT_TOUCHSCREEN
𝜙 depends = IIO ∧ IIO_BUFFER
𝜙 prompt = true
𝜙 default = false

𝜙 reverse and 𝜙 direct are the reverse and direct dependencies respectively. The option is always visible since it has an unconditional prompt (𝜙 prompt ), and the default value is false since it has
no default specification (𝜙 default ).
Substituting the symbolic formulas into 𝜙 config and simplifying
the disjunctive terms, we get the following:

substitution

(IIO_BUFFER_CB

contrapositive

(3)

∧ TOUCHSCREEN_ADC ∧ IIO ∧ INPUT_TOUCHSCREEN)

This simple optimization has a substantial impact on precision and
performance as we show in the evaluation section.

4.3

ESEC/FSE ’21, August 23–28, 2021, Athens, Greece

∨ (IIO ∧ IIO_BUFFER

(4)

∧ ¬(TOUCHSCREEN_ADC ∧ IIO ∧ INPUT_TOUCHSCREEN))

Modeling Kconfig Semantics

Until now, we have described 𝜙 unmet with placeholders for configuration option constraints. But interpreting these constraints
as logical formulas requires modeling Kconfig’s semantics. In this
section we show how we methodically derive these from our formal
semantics (Section 3).
Recall that Kconfig takes a configuration file as input and determines its validity according to the specifications. As with prior
Kconfig feature modeling tools, we represent configuration options
as symbolic Boolean options, collapsing tristate option’s y and m
to true. While this underapproximates tristate, it greatly reduces
the space of possible configurations, improving solver performance.
Similarly, we approximate non-Booleans with a finite range of options, as in prior work [30]. Less than 5% of options are non-Boolean
in Linux Kconfig specifications.
To derive the model from Kconfig semantics, recall that our concrete semantics describes each case in which a Kconfig statement

∨ (false)

(5)

∨ (¬IIO_BUFFER_CCB ∧ ¬(IIO ∧ IIO_BUFFER)

(6)

∧ ¬(TOUCHSCREEN_ADC ∧ IIO ∧ INPUT_TOUCHSCREEN))

In summary, this formula means that IIO_BUFFER_CB is legal to
enable if its reverse dependency holds (subexpression 3), is legal
to either enable or disable if its direct dependency holds (subexpression 4), never takes a default value (subexpression 5), and can
otherwise only be disabled when its direct and reverse dependencies
do not hold (subexpression 6). The rest of the symbolic evaluator’s
valuation functions are similarly derived from the formal semantics
and can be found with the openly-archived formal semantics [40].
The benefit of this approach is that is removes guesswork from
designing Kconfig analysis tools. Instead, tool writers can rely on a
common semantics to mechanically derive an analysis for whatever
abstraction they would like to use for analysis, tailoring the choice
of formalism for configuration options based on their specific application. We demonstrate just one possible set of choices for deriving

899

ESEC/FSE ’21, August 23–28, 2021, Athens, Greece

Jeho Oh, Necip Fazıl Yıldıran, Julian Braha, and Paul Gazzillo

6.1

Kconfig files

kextract
Desugared Kconfig

kclause
Logical models

kismet
Bug conditions
Z3

klocalizer
Bug alarms and
.config file tests

Figure 6: The components of the infrastructure and how
they work together for unmet dependency bug-finding.

the Kconfig analysis. Moreover, future extensions to Kconfig by
developers can be captured by updates to the semantics, easing
adoption for Kconfig tools that mechanically derive their analyses
from the semantics.

5

6.2

Data Availability

All experimental data are available as archived open data [39].

IMPLEMENTATION

The analysis framework is implemented in about two thousand
source lines of Python, and about one thousand source lines of C. It
consists of four components, shown in Figure 6. The kextract tool
wraps the parser from the Linux implementation of Kconfig [54]
with a C extension to desugar the Kconfig specification into a desugared version of the Kconfig language. The kclause tool, written in
Python, reads in desugared Kconfig and constructs logical formulas
for each configuration options’ constraints, outputting them in the
SMTLIB2 [9] format. kismet, also written in Python, finds each
select construct from the kextract output and uses the logical
models from kclause to generate the unmet dependency condition
for each construct. kismet finally passes this condition in SMTLIB2
format to the klocalizer tool, which uses the Z3 SMT solver [13]
to check for the satisfiability of the bug condition. For satisfiable
conditions, klocalizer can also generate solutions to the condition in the Linux .config file format, which we use to test the
solution against the actual Kconfig implementation. All source code
is available online as free and open-source software1 as well as in
an openly-archived artifact [38].

6

Experimental Setup

We use Kconfig specifications from a recent version (v5.4.4) of the
Linux kernel source code2 as the target of our study. With over
140,000 lines of specifications and over 15,000 configuration options,
Linux represents, to our knowledge, the largest user of Kconfig.
The Linux kernel not only provides a large Kconfig specification,
but multiple ones as well, due to its support for multiple hardware
platforms. Each of its 28 architecture families3 has its own Kconfig
specification, effectively providing 28 separate Kconfig specifications to use for evaluation. Because of the hardware abstraction
layer, however, these architectures share at least some portion of
the codebase in common, and therefore also share a large portion
of their Kconfig specifications; about 100,000 lines, two-thirds, are
architecture-independent. Each architecture has between 10,014
and 12,744 select constructs for a total of 289,202. Deduplicating
these, there are 17,006 unique select constructs, although the constraints due to architecture-specific Kconfig files may differ. Due to
this sharing, we not only report results for each architecture’s Kconfig specifications but also the aggregate and deduplicated alarms
across architectures.
All experiments were executed on a server with an AMD EPYC
7401 24-Core Processor with 512GB of RAM running Ubuntu 18.04,
where we measured performance using the UNIX time utility. Since
this machine allows for high parallelism, we ran the experiments
for the 28 architectures’ Kconfig specifications in parallel on separate copies of the Linux kernel source code. Replication scripts are
available with the source code repository1 .

6.3

Research Questions

Our evaluation seeks to answer the following research questions:
RQ1 (Precision) How precise is our analysis when finding
unmet dependencies? To measure bug-finding effectiveness, we
run our tool on all 28 Linux Kconfig specifications and collect the
alarms reported. We also automatically validate whether the alarms
are true positives by generating and building test cases automatically. We expect that, if our semantics reflect real Kconfig behavior,
that our symbolic model of unmet dependencies and Kconfig behavior should yield high precision, i.e., few false positives.
RQ2 (Performance) How fast is bug-finding? We record the
running time of our bug-finder when applied to all 28 Linux Kconfig
specifications, i.e., the experiment from RQ1. We report the distribution of running times per architecture, the aggregate time, as well
as the breakdown between desugaring, generating bug conditions,
and solving. We expect that our design choices and optimization
will yield a fast enough analysis to make running kismet feasible
for developers to use regularly.
RQ3 (Impact) How useful are the resulting alarms to developers? We evaluate the impact of our bug-finding approach
by manually submitting some reports and patches to the kernel

EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATION

We evaluate our bug finding approach for precision, performance,
and impact on real-world code.

2 https://cdn.kernel.org/pub/linux/kernel/v5.x/linux-5.4.4.tar.xz

1 https://github.com/paulgazz/kmax

nds32, nios2, openrisc, parisc, powerpc, riscv, s390, sh, sh64, sparc, sparc64, um, unicore32, x86_64, and xtensa

3 alpha, arc, arm, arm64, c6x, csky, h8300, hexagon, i386, ia64, m68k, microblaze, mips,

900

Finding Broken Linux Configuration Specifications by Statically Analyzing the Kconfig Language

Table 2: kismet’s bug-finding time in minutes for all 28 Kconfig specifications, broken down by each phase of analysis.

Table 1: kismet’s bug-finding results across all 28 architecture Kconfig specifications.

Metric
Constructs
Alarms raised
Precision

Max
12,744
53.00
100%

Percentiles
75th
50th
25th
10,386 10,108 10,044
31.25
25.00
22.75
100%
100%
100%

Min
10,014
10.00
100%

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

maintainers. We expect that, if the resulting alarms are correct
and provide value to the kernel maintainers, they will confirm the
reports and accept our patches.
RQ4 (Comparison) How does our approach compare to
random configuration testing? To our knowledge, no related
tool for finding unmet dependencies in Kconfig exists. To provide
a baseline time to search for bugs, we use random configuration
testing with Kconfig’s built-in randconfig tool. We compare the
bugs found, given the same amount of time as kismet and also
allow randconfig generation to run for several days. We expect
that our static approach will perform better, given the enormity of
the search space of configurations, but we also expect to find new
bugs missed by kismet’s underapproximation of non-Booleans.

6.4

ESEC/FSE ’21, August 23–28, 2021, Athens, Greece

Analysis
Phase
kclause
Syntax check
𝜙 unmet
𝜙 unmet (precise)
Confirmation
Total Time

Time Percentiles (minutes)
Max 75th 50th 25th Min
7.21
5.52
5.35
5.21
5.03
0.15
0.12
0.12
0.11
0.11
2.35
2.00
1.94
1.88
1.62
79.31 33.79 32.16 31.23 29.08
2.01
1.06
0.81
0.72
0.38
90.21 42.12 40.30 39.41 37.13

architecture’s Kconfig specification but not others, which is possible because of architecture-specific constraints. In these cases, we
counted the construct as a true alarm in the deduplicated set.
Summary: our approach is precise, yielding 100% precision
on Linux’s very large, real-world Kconfig specification, and
finds many new bugs: 781 true positive bugs or 151 if we deduplicate common constructs across architectures.

6.5

RQ2: Performance

To evaluate performance, we measure kismet’s running time, broken down by each phase of its analysis. Table 2 is the distribution
of running times across each of the 28 architecture-specific Kconfig
specifications. Each row is the phase of analysis, with the total time
in the last row, while each column is percentiles in the distribution
of running times.
kismet takes between 37 and 90 minutes on one Kconfig specification file, for a total of 20 hours in all, including the time spent
generating a test case to automatically confirm true positives. We
break down the timing into five phases: (1) kclause is the time spent
modeling Kconfig constructs, which we perform at the beginning
of analysis to cache the results. (2) Syntax check includes both identifying each select construct and the optimization that rules out
selectees with no dependencies. As discussed in Section 4.2 on
optimization, (3) 𝜙 unmet is the time spent checking the imprecise
bug formula, and (4) 𝜙 unmet (precise) is the time spent checking the
precise bug formula, if the imprecise one does not rule out the bug.
(5) Confirmation is the time spent generating a test case for the
bug and checking it against the actual Kconfig implementation;
this is not part of the static analysis, per se, but it only takes a
comparatively small amount of time.
In most cases, kismet takes less than hour for an architecture,
making it fast enough for use on each commit of the Kconfig specification. The largest amount of time is spent on the precise formula
check, which shows the importance of our optimization in avoiding
making that check. Checking 𝜙 unmet is fast: it takes less than an
hour for hundreds of thousands of select constructs, albeit with
low precision (less than 2%). 85% of the constructs are ruled out,
however, reducing the time needed to solve the precise condition.
Summary: kismet is fast, taking between 37 and 90 minutes to analyze between 10,014 to 12,744 select constructs in a
Kconfig specification, enabling frequent bug finding runs.

RQ1: Precision

We run kismet on each of the 28 architectures’ Kconfig specifications and collect the resulting alarms. kismet reports the pair of
configuration options involved in the unmet dependency, i.e., the
selector and the selectee. Finally, we validate whether the alarm is
a true positive by generating a test case. This works by querying
the Z3 SMT solver for a satisfying solution to 𝜙 unmet (precise) , the
bug’s logical formula, then converting the solution into the Linux
.config configuration file format.
Table 1 summarizes the analysis results of our experiments. The
rows list the number of constructs analyzed, the number of alarms
raised by kismet, and the precision, i.e., the percent of all alarms
that are true positives. The columns show the distribution of these
metrics across the 28 architectures’ Kconfig specifications as percentiles. kismet checks between 10,014 and 12,744 select constructs
for each architecture, finding between 10 and 53 alarms per Kconfig
specification, for a total of 781 alarms over 289,202 constructs. All
alarms are confirmed to be true positives by generating test cases
that trigger the alarm, for a precision of 100%. While such high
precision would be unusual for static analysis, the core fragment of
Kconfig that we model requires no over-approximation that could
lead to false positives. Since the ground truth number of bugs in
real-world Linux Kconfig specifications is unknown, we do not
compute recall, but we address false negatives in RQ4.
Although each architecture has its own Kconfig specification,
they all share a large common set of Kconfig files. The consequence
is that fixing a bug in one architecture’s Kconfig specification can fix
it for several others. Deduplicating these bug yields 151 total alarms
for unique select constructs across all architectures. In some cases,
the same select construct was a true unmet dependency in one

901

ESEC/FSE ’21, August 23–28, 2021, Athens, Greece

6.6

Jeho Oh, Necip Fazıl Yıldıran, Julian Braha, and Paul Gazzillo

Table 3: Percent of the bugs found by kismet compared to
randconfig given both the same amount of time as and 135x
more time than kismet.

RQ3: Impact

We evaluate the impact of our bug-finder, and the semantics on
which it is based, by reporting alarms to the kernel developers and
submitting patches to the mainline Linux repository, specifically
via the Linux kernel mailing list [50] and the kernel.org Bugzilla
website [3]. Developer confirmation of bugs provides confidence in
the utility of the alarms, beyond precision. Moreover, acceptance
of patches by official maintainers reflects the beneficial impact of
the results on this prevalent and frequently used codebase.
While our bug-finder is fully automated, submitting reports and
patches is a manual process, requiring time to create them and communicate with human Linux maintainers. Moreover, maintainers
may opt to not patch even true alarms, may not respond immediately, or may request different changes than what we proposed in
the patch. Since the Kconfig specification gradually changes over
time with the rest of the codebase, prior bugs may no longer occur,
due to manual fixes, removal of options, etc. We believe it is feasible
to use kismet in continuous integration, but we leave such infrastructure development as future work. For these reasons, we have
not yet submitted all alarms; repairing all is an ongoing process,
and we report the current state of the bug repairs in progress.
As of writing, we have submitted 38 reports or patches, 19 have
been confirmed with the remainder pending, and 15 of our patches
have already been committed to the Linux kernel codebase. Up-todate information about the reporting and patching effort can be
found in the source code repository4 .
Knowing the effect of unmet dependencies on the kernel is difficult to measure. Such a configuration is not supposed to be feasible,
and developers have been so far highly receptive to patches of
unmet dependency bugs. While we do not know all the effects of
an unmet dependency, one common result is a broken build, e.g.,
Figure 1, which is undesirable for any software product. We measured how often a broken build results from the bugs we found
by attempting to build the generated .config from kismet and
hand-checking the reason for the broken build. Build errors account
for 68% of all tests. 29% of configuration files trigger build errors
whose root cause is the unmet dependency bug from which the
configuration file was generated. 27% fail due to bugs other than
the one used to generate the test case. Since a build error halts the
build process, we cannot easily determine whether the build would
have encountered an error related to the unmet dependency, so we
conservatively assume these are not caused by unmet dependencies.
Summary: The bug finding results have resulted in 38 reports and 15 committed patches to the Linux kernel so far,
with further patch submission and discussion ongoing.

6.7

Tool
kismet
randconfig
Same time
135x time

Max
100.00%

Percentiles
75th
50th
25th
100.00% 100.00% 100.00%

Min
87.10%

62.86%
77.14%

12.94%
22.55%

0.00%
0.00%

6.80%
17.42%

2.68%
10.54%

unmet dependency alarms, yielding 175 unique unmet dependency
bugs. Comparing these to kismet’s results, kismet adds 614 unique
unmet dependencies not found in this random testing.
Since no other tools to our knowledge analyze unmet dependencies, we compare the performance of kismet against a random
testing approach, to see whether there is a benefit in running time
and bugs found to using kismet. Using the combined set of bugs
from months of randconfig and kismet’s results, we compare the
percent of bugs found given the same amount of time. Table 3 shows
the results of this comparison of the percentage of bugs found from
the benchmark set. The columns show the distribution of these
percentages across all architectures’ Kconfig specifications. kismet
finds 100% for almost all architectures, reflecting the fact that even
after months of compute time, very few additional bugs were found
by random testing compared with kismet. randconfig (row łSame
timež), given the same amount of time that kismet took, finds on
average only a small fraction of the set of bugs, 6.80%, with a maximum of only 62.86%. Even given several days to run (row ł135x
timež), randconfig still only finds a fraction of the benchmark
bugs. In contrast, there were only eight bugs not found by kismet,
leading to a worst-case of 87.10% benchmark coverage by kismet.
While our benchmark is not the ground truth of Linux’s complete
set of bugs, which is not feasible to find by hand given the months
of compute time to generate configuration files, it provides at least
an estimate of the relative performance of kismet versus random
testing. The results show the large performance benefit of using
kismet compared to random testing. In the same amount of time,
kismet finds many more bugs than random testing, providing a
fast and precise complement to random testing that can be run
regularly against new commits to the Kconfig specification.
Summary: kismet finds many more true positives bugs in
far less time than random testing, although there are also
false negatives as expected by deliberate underapproximation.

RQ4: Comparison

While kismet is 100% precise for its fragment of the Kconfig semantics, its underapproximation of non-Boolean leaves it susceptible
to false negatives. To gather a set of unmet dependency benchmarks that include bugs not findable by kismet, we use a built-in
Kconfig utility for generating random configurations. Generating
random configurations for over four days for each architecture
in parallel (a combined time of more than three months), we generated over 11,000,000 configuration files, which raised 2,857,938

7

THREATS TO VALIDITY

Internal Threats. Our formal semantics needs to match the actual
behavior of Kconfig, otherwise, any analyses based on it may yield
incorrect results. We mitigated this using the Kconfig documentation, reviewing its actual C implementation, and collecting a Kconfig
test suite. Moreover, the 100% precision of the bug-finder, validated
with generated test cases and some developer confirmation, testifies
to the accuracy of the semantics. kismet is deliberately underapproximate for non-Boolean options, however, so this part of the

4 https://github.com/paulgazz/kmax/blob/master/docs/bugs_found.md

902

Finding Broken Linux Configuration Specifications by Statically Analyzing the Kconfig Language

semantics is not supported by the bug-finding results, but by the
documentation, implementation, and test suite only.

implementations of SmartFrog compilers. Sotiropulous et al. formally modeled the system call trace of the Puppet tool to find faults
from ordering violations on resource usage [49]. Horton and Parnin
infer system dependencies from Python code in order to generate
Docker specification files [22]. They also inferred dependencies
from Python code snippets to check if their package dependencies are out of date [23]. Bouchet et al. use formal verification to
check for inadvertent public access to Amazon S3 instances [12].
Chenygyuan et al. mined frequently used dependencies between
entities from deployment descriptors for Java-EE-platform-based
applications to validate if a new deployment descriptor is violating
mined dependencies [60]. Hanappi et al. formally modeled configuration scripts and resource usage to test if a system can recover
from failures such as network outages and reach a stable state [21].

External Threats. While Kconfig is used by several popular, lowlevel systems software (BusyBox, coreboot, etc), our evaluation only
applies to Linux. Linux, however, is the largest user of Kconfig that
we know of, and has multiple Kconfig specifications. We evaluate
our bug-finder on one recent version of the Linux source code, but
Kconfig specifications change gradually with each kernel version.
Different versions may yield different numbers of alarms. We leave
a long-term study of Kconfig bugs across versions and projects
as future work. Our bug-finder currently checks for one kind of
bug. The performance of the bug-finder could vary for different
bug types or analysis tasks. Our work is specific to the Kconfig
specification language, so we do not show applicability to other
specification languages. Given the large time investment in creating
and evaluating accurate formal semantics and a corresponding
analysis infrastructure, we leave generalizing the approach to other
specification languages as future work.

8

ESEC/FSE ’21, August 23–28, 2021, Athens, Greece

Studies on variability bugs. Some prior work extracted variability
information from Makefiles and source code for finding bugs, dead
code blocks, or inconsistencies between variability specification and
implementation. [11, 14, 19, 36, 37, 48, 52]. Prior work also analyzed
bugs or warnings raised from sampled configurations to classify
them and understand how they are introduced [33, 34]. Similar
analyses were performed on the bugs or vulnerabilities reported in
the bug database or source commits [6, 7, 17, 35]. Others studied
configuration sampling algorithms to find more variability bugs
with fewer samples [29, 32, 46, 55].

RELATED WORK

Modeling Kconfig specifications. There are several prior efforts
that convert Kconfig to logical formulas for various applications.
Zengler et al. and Walch et al. modeled Kconfig in the DIMACS SAT
format with the goal of finding Kconfig language metrics, including
the number of options, types, and mandatory configuration options [57, 61]. She et al describe a formal semantics [43] and a tool
called LVAT that converts Kconfig specifications to the DIMACS
SAT solver format [10, 44, 45]. It was designed for collecting statistics about the Kconfig language such as the number of options,
the hierarchy of dependencies, and other metrics [10], rather than
for precise formal verification of configuration specifications. Tool
development appears to have stopped for LVAT in 2013 [42]. The
undertaker project has a tool to convert Kconfig’s dumpconf output
to the DIMACS SAT format for use in identifying dead code blocks
in unpreprocessed C code [4, 53]. The kconfigreader tool converts the output of a Kconfig tool called dumpconf, which dumps
each configuration options’ constraint expressions, into the DIMACS SAT solver format [25, 30]. El-Sharkawy et al., describes
an informal semantics of Kconfig, provides illustrative examples,
and evaluates the limitations of other tools [15]. Fernandez et al.
described informal semantics for Kconfig constructs that they identified as incorrectly supported in prior conversion tools [16]. They
provide a set of example Kconfig constructs that illustrate these
limitations, which we have incorporated into kclause’s test suite.
Fernandez et al. also describe a new conversion tool that produces
Binary Decision Diagrams but has not been evaluated on Linux
Kconfig specifications.

9

CONCLUSION

We have introduced a new formal semantics and model checking
infrastructure for analyzing Kconfig specification files and methodically derived a bug-finder, called kismet, for unmet dependencies,
a common pitfall for Kconfig maintainers. Our results show that
our bug-finder is precise, fast, and has resulted in patches to the
mainline Linux kernel source code confirmed and accepted by maintainers. Future work includes continuing to repair all bugs found by
kismet, applying it to ongoing kernel development and other software, and applying our analysis framework to other maintenance
challenges.
We also plan to explore applying these model checking principles
to other configuration specification languages to further improve
the state of language tooling for software operations at large. As
software operations are further automated, the languages used
for configuring, building, and deploying software become an increasingly large component of the source code. These languages
introduce new opportunities for less traditional software vulnerabilities, such as security misconfiguration. As our work demonstrates,
these languages lend themselves to automated analysis, suggesting the future benefits of applying rigorous design and automated
reasoning to software operations languages in general.

Analyses of other configuration languages. Shambaugh et al. [41]
perform formal verification of the Puppet deployment configuration language to detect non-deterministic system state updates and
other undesirable system configurations. Weiss et al. [59] automate Puppet configuration repair using formal reasoning over a
propositional model of the language. Anderson et al. [8] formally
verify the SmartFrog infrastructure deployment language to prove
properties such as termination of compilation, comparing multiple

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank the anonymous referees for their valuable
comments and helpful suggestions, Julia Lawall for advice and input
into the work, and Elaine Weyuker for her feedback. This work is
supported by the National Science Foundation under CCF-1941816
and CCF-1840934.

903

ESEC/FSE ’21, August 23–28, 2021, Athens, Greece

Jeho Oh, Necip Fazıl Yıldıran, Julian Braha, and Paul Gazzillo

REFERENCES

the 2016 ACM SIGPLAN International Conference on Object-Oriented Programming,
Systems, Languages, and Applications (Amsterdam, Netherlands) (OOPSLA 2016).
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 328ś343. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/2983990.2984000
[22] Eric Horton and Chris Parnin. 2019. DockerizeMe: Automatic Inference of
Environment Dependencies for Python Code Snippets. In 2019 IEEE/ACM 41st
International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE). 328ś338. https://doi.
org/10.1109/ICSE.2019.00047
[23] Eric Horton and Chris Parnin. 2019. V2: Fast Detection of Configuration Drift in
Python. In 2019 34th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software
Engineering (ASE). 477ś488. https://doi.org/10.1109/ASE.2019.00052
[24] Alexandru Florin Iosif-Lazar, Jean Melo, Aleksandar S. Dimovski, Claus Brabrand,
and Andrzej Wasowski. 2017. Effective Analysis of C Programs by Rewriting
Variability. CoRR (2017).
[25] Christian Kästner. 2020. kconfigreader.
https://github.com/ckaestne/
kconfigreader, last accessed on 11/19/20.
[26] Christian Kästner, Paolo G. Giarrusso, Tillmann Rendel, Sebastian Erdweg, Klaus
Ostermann, and Thorsten Berger. 2011. Variability-Aware Parsing in the Presence
of Lexical Macros and Conditional Compilation. In Proceedings of the 2011 ACM International Conference on Object Oriented Programming Systems Languages and Applications (Portland, Oregon, USA) (OOPSLA ’11). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 805ś824. https://doi.org/10.1145/2048066.2048128
[27] Christian Kästner, Klaus Ostermann, and Sebastian Erdweg. 2012. A VariabilityAware Module System. In Proceedings of the ACM International Conference on
Object Oriented Programming Systems Languages and Applications (Tucson, Arizona, USA) (OOPSLA ’12). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY,
USA, 773ś792. https://doi.org/10.1145/2384616.2384673
[28] The kernel development community. 2020. Kconfig Language.
https:
//www.kernel.org/doc/html/latest/kbuild/kconfig-language.html, last accessed
on 11/19/20.
[29] Chang Hwan Peter Kim, Don S. Batory, and Sarfraz Khurshid. 2011. Reducing
Combinatorics in Testing Product Lines. In Proceedings of the Tenth International
Conference on Aspect-Oriented Software Development (Porto de Galinhas, Brazil)
(AOSD ’11). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 57ś68.
https://doi.org/10.1145/1960275.1960284
[30] Christian Kästner. 2017. Differential Testing for Variational Analyses: Experience
from Developing KConfigReader. arXiv:1706.09357 [cs.SE]
[31] Jörg Liebig, Alexander von Rhein, Christian Kästner, Sven Apel, Jens Dörre, and
Christian Lengauer. 2013. Scalable Analysis of Variable Software. In Proceedings
of the 2013 9th Joint Meeting on Foundations of Software Engineering (Saint Petersburg, Russia) (ESEC/FSE 2013). Association for Computing Machinery, New
York, NY, USA, 81ś91. https://doi.org/10.1145/2491411.2491437
[32] Flávio Medeiros, Christian Kästner, Márcio Ribeiro, Rohit Gheyi, and Sven Apel.
2016. A Comparison of 10 Sampling Algorithms for Configurable Systems. In
Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Software Engineering (Austin,
Texas) (ICSE ’16). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA,
643ś654. https://doi.org/10.1145/2884781.2884793
[33] Jean Melo, Elvis Flesborg, Claus Brabrand, and Andrzej Wasowski. 2016. A
Quantitative Analysis of Variability Warnings in Linux. In Proceedings of the Tenth
International Workshop on Variability Modelling of Software-intensive Systems
(Salvador, Brazil) (VaMoS ’16). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 3ś8. https://doi.org/
10.1145/2866614.2866615
[34] Austin Mordahl, Jeho Oh, Ugur Koc, Shiyi Wei, and Paul Gazzillo. 2019. An
Empirical Study of Real-World Variability Bugs Detected by Variability-Oblivious
Tools. In Proceedings of the 2019 27th ACM Joint Meeting on European Software
Engineering Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering
(Tallinn, Estonia) (ESEC/FSE 2019). Association for Computing Machinery, New
York, NY, USA, 50ś61. https://doi.org/10.1145/3338906.3338967
[35] Raphael Muniz, Larissa Braz, Rohit Gheyi, Wilkerson Andrade, Baldoino Fonseca,
and Márcio Ribeiro. 2018. A Qualitative Analysis of Variability Weaknesses
in Configurable Systems with #Ifdefs. In Proceedings of the 12th International
Workshop on Variability Modelling of Software-Intensive Systems (Madrid, Spain)
(VAMOS 2018). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 51ś58. https://doi.org/10.1145/3168365.
3168382
[36] Sarah Nadi, Thorsten Berger, Christian Kästner, and Krzysztof Czarnecki. 2015.
Where Do Configuration Constraints Stem From? An Extraction Approach and an
Empirical Study. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering 41, 8 (2015), 820ś841.
https://doi.org/10.1109/TSE.2015.2415793
[37] Sarah Nadi and Ric Holt. 2012. Mining Kbuild to Detect Variability Anomalies
in Linux. In Proceedings of the 2012 16th European Conference on Software Maintenance and Reengineering (CSMR ’12). IEEE Computer Society, USA, 107ś116.
https://doi.org/10.1109/CSMR.2012.21
[38] Jeho Oh, Necip Fazıl Yıldıran, Julian Braha, and Paul Gazzillo. 2021. Artifact from
"Finding Broken Linux Configuration Specifications by Statically Analyzing the
Kconfig Language". https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.4885001
[39] Jeho Oh, Necip Fazıl Yıldıran, Julian Braha, and Paul Gazzillo. 2021. Experimental data from "Finding Broken Linux Configuration Specifications by Statically
Analyzing the Kconfig Language". https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.4563310

[1] 2008. Boogie: An Intermediate Verification Language. https://www.microsoft.
com/en-us/research/project/boogie-an-intermediate-verification-language/.
[2] 2020. Kconfig macro language. https://www.kernel.org/doc/html/latest/kbuild/
kconfig-macro-language.html, last accessed on 11/19/20.
[3] 2020. Kernel.org Bugzilla page. https://bugzilla.kernel.org/, last accessed on
11/19/20.
[4] 2020. Undertaker Project Page. https://vamos.informatik.uni-erlangen.de/trac/
undertaker, last accessed on 11/19/20.
[5] 2021. 0-Day Test Service. https://01.org/lkp/documentation/0-day-test-service.
[6] Iago Abal, Claus Brabrand, and Andrzej Wasowski. 2014. 42 Variability Bugs in
the Linux Kernel: A Qualitative Analysis. In Proceedings of the 29th ACM/IEEE
International Conference on Automated Software Engineering (Vasteras, Sweden)
(ASE ’14). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 421ś432.
https://doi.org/10.1145/2642937.2642990
[7] Iago Abal, Jean Melo, Ştefan Stănciulescu, Claus Brabrand, Márcio Ribeiro, and
Andrzej Wąsowski. 2018. Variability Bugs in Highly Configurable Systems: A
Qualitative Analysis. ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol. 26, 3, Article 10 (Jan.
2018), 34 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3149119
[8] Paul Anderson and Herry Herry. 2016. A formal semantics for the SmartFrog
configuration language. Journal of Network and Systems Management 24, 2 (2016),
309ś345. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10922-015-9351-y
[9] Clark Barrett, Aaron Stump, and Cesare Tinelli. 2010. The SMT-LIB Standard:
Version 2.0. In Proceedings of the 8th International Workshop on Satisfiability
Modulo Theories (Edinburgh, UK), A. Gupta and D. Kroening (Eds.).
[10] Thorsten Berger, Steven She, Rafael Lotufo, Andrzej Wasowski, and Krzysztof
Czarnecki. 2013. A Study of Variability Models and Languages in the Systems
Software Domain. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering 39, 12 (2013), 1611ś
1640. https://doi.org/10.1109/TSE.2013.34
[11] Eric Bodden, Társis Tolêdo, Márcio Ribeiro, Claus Brabrand, Paulo Borba, and
Mira Mezini. 2013. SPL<sup>LIFT</sup>: Statically Analyzing Software Product
Lines in Minutes Instead of Years. (2013), 355ś364. https://doi.org/10.1145/
2491956.2491976
[12] Malik Bouchet, Byron Cook, Bryant Cutler, Anna Druzkina, Andrew Gacek,
Liana Hadarean, Ranjit Jhala, Brad Marshall, Dan Peebles, Neha Rungta, Cole
Schlesinger, Chriss Stephens, Carsten Varming, and Andy Warfield. 2020. Block
Public Access: Trust Safety Verification of Access Control Policies. In Proceedings
of the 28th ACM Joint Meeting on European Software Engineering Conference
and Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering (Virtual Event, USA)
(ESEC/FSE 2020). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA,
281ś291. https://doi.org/10.1145/3368089.3409728
[13] Leonardo De Moura and Nikolaj Bjùrner. 2008. Z3: An Efficient SMT Solver. In
Proceedings of the Theory and Practice of Software, 14th International Conference
on Tools and Algorithms for the Construction and Analysis of Systems (Budapest,
Hungary) (TACAS’08/ETAPS’08). Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, 337ś340.
[14] Christian Dietrich, Reinhard Tartler, Wolfgang Schröder-Preikschat, and Daniel
Lohmann. 2012. A Robust Approach for Variability Extraction from the Linux
Build System. In Proceedings of the 16th International Software Product Line Conference - Volume 1 (Salvador, Brazil) (SPLC ’12). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 21ś30. https://doi.org/10.1145/2362536.2362544
[15] Sascha El-Sharkawy, Adam Krafczyk, and Klaus Schmid. 2015. Analysing the
Kconfig Semantics and Its Analysis Tools. In Proceedings of the 2015 ACM SIGPLAN
International Conference on Generative Programming: Concepts and Experiences
(Pittsburgh, PA, USA) (GPCE 2015). Association for Computing Machinery, New
York, NY, USA, 45ś54. https://doi.org/10.1145/2814204.2814222
[16] David Fernandez-Amoros, Ruben Heradio, Christoph Mayr-Dorn, and Alexander
Egyed. 2019. A Kconfig Translation to Logic with One-Way Validation System. In
Proceedings of the 23rd International Systems and Software Product Line Conference
- Volume A (Paris, France) (SPLC ’19). Association for Computing Machinery, New
York, NY, USA, 303ś308. https://doi.org/10.1145/3336294.3336313
[17] Gabriel Ferreira, Momin Malik, Christian Kästner, Jürgen Pfeffer, and Sven Apel.
2016. Do #Ifdefs Influence the Occurrence of Vulnerabilities? An Empirical Study
of the Linux Kernel. In Proceedings of the 20th International Systems and Software
Product Line Conference (Beijing, China) (SPLC ’16). ACM, New York, NY, USA,
65ś73. https://doi.org/10.1145/2934466.2934467
[18] Alejandra Garrido and Ralph Johnson. 2005. Analyzing Multiple Configurations
of a C Program. In ICSM. 379ś388.
[19] Paul Gazzillo. 2017. Kmax: Finding All Configurations of Kbuild Makefiles
Statically. In Proceedings of the 2017 11th Joint Meeting on Foundations of Software
Engineering (Paderborn, Germany) (ESEC/FSE 2017). ACM, New York, NY, USA,
279ś290. https://doi.org/10.1145/3106237.3106283
[20] Paul Gazzillo and Robert Grimm. 2012. SuperC: Parsing All of C by Taming the
Preprocessor. In Proceedings of the 33rd ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming
Language Design and Implementation (Beijing, China) (PLDI ’12). ACM, New York,
NY, USA, 323ś334. https://doi.org/10.1145/2254064.2254103
[21] Oliver Hanappi, Waldemar Hummer, and Schahram Dustdar. 2016. Asserting
Reliable Convergence for Configuration Management Scripts. In Proceedings of

904

Finding Broken Linux Configuration Specifications by Statically Analyzing the Kconfig Language

[40] Jeho Oh, Necip Fazıl Yıldıran, Julian Braha, and Paul Gazzillo. 2021. Formal
Semantics of Kconfig for "Finding Broken Linux Configuration Specifications
by Statically Analyzing the Kconfig Language". https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.
4950763
[41] Rian Shambaugh, Aaron Weiss, and Arjun Guha. 2016. Rehearsal: A Configuration
Verification Tool for Puppet. In Proceedings of the 37th ACM SIGPLAN Conference
on Programming Language Design and Implementation (Santa Barbara, CA, USA)
(PLDI ’16). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 416ś430.
https://doi.org/10.1145/2908080.2908083
[42] Steven She. 2013. LVAT Archive. https://code.google.com/archive/p/linuxvariability-analysis-tools/, last accessed on 11/19/20.
[43] Steven She and Thorsten Berger. 2010. Formal semantics of the Kconfig language.
Technical note, University of Waterloo 24 (2010).
[44] Steven She, Rafael Lotufo, Thorsten Berger, Andrzej Wąsowski, and Krzysztof
Czarnecki. 2011. Reverse Engineering Feature Models. In Proceedings of the 33rd
International Conference on Software Engineering (Waikiki, Honolulu, HI, USA)
(ICSE ’11). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 461ś470.
https://doi.org/10.1145/1985793.1985856
[45] She, Steven. 2013. Feature Model Synthesis. Ph.D. Dissertation. http://hdl.handle.
net/10012/7834
[46] Jiangfan Shi, Myra B. Cohen, and Matthew B. Dwyer. 2012. Integration Testing of
Software Product Lines Using Compositional Symbolic Execution. In Proceedings
of the 15th International Conference on Fundamental Approaches to Software Engineering (Tallinn, Estonia) (FASE’12). Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, 270ś284.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-28872-2_19
[47] J. Sincero, H. Schirmeier, W. Schröder-Preikschat, and O. Spinczyk. 2007. Is the
linux kernel a software product line?. In Proceedings of the International Workshop
on Open Source Software and Product Lines (Kyoto, Japan) (SPLC-OSSPL). 134ś140.
[48] Julio Sincero, Reinhard Tartler, Daniel Lohmann, and Wolfgang SchröderPreikschat. 2010. Efficient Extraction and Analysis of Preprocessor-Based
Variability. In Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Generative Programming and Component Engineering (Eindhoven, The Netherlands)
(GPCE ’10). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 33ś42.
https://doi.org/10.1145/1868294.1868300
[49] Thodoris Sotiropoulos, Dimitris Mitropoulos, and Diomidis Spinellis. 2020. Practical Fault Detection in Puppet Programs. In Proceedings of the ACM/IEEE
42nd International Conference on Software Engineering (Seoul, South Korea)
(ICSE ’20). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 26ś37.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3377811.3380384
[50] Jasper Spaans. 2020. Linux Kernel Mailing List. https://lkml.org/, last accessed
on 11/19/20.
[51] Reinhard Tartler, Christian Dietrich, Julio Sincero, Wolfgang Schröder-Preikschat,
and Daniel Lohmann. 2014. Static Analysis of Variability in System Software:

ESEC/FSE ’21, August 23–28, 2021, Athens, Greece

The 90,000 #ifdefs Issue. In Proceedings of the 2014 USENIX Conference on USENIX
Annual Technical Conference (Philadelphia, PA) (USENIX ATC’14). USENIX Association, USA, 421ś432.
[52] Reinhard Tartler, Daniel Lohmann, Julio Sincero, and Wolfgang SchröderPreikschat. 2011. Feature Consistency in Compile-Time-Configurable System
Software: Facing the Linux 10,000 Feature Problem. In Proceedings of the Sixth
Conference on Computer Systems (Salzburg, Austria) (EuroSys ’11). Association
for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 47ś60. https://doi.org/10.1145/
1966445.1966451
[53] Reinhard Tartler, Julio Sincero, Christian Dietrich, Wolfgang Schröder-Preikschat,
and Daniel Lohmann. 2012. Revealing and repairing configuration inconsistencies in large-scale system software. International Journal on Software Tools for
Technology Transfer 14, 5 (2012), 531ś551.
[54] Linux Tovalds. 2020. Linux Kconfig Source Code. https://github.com/torvalds/
linux/tree/master/scripts/kconfig, last accessed on 11/19/20.
[55] Mahsa Varshosaz, Mustafa Al-Hajjaji, Thomas Thüm, Tobias Runge, Mohammad Reza Mousavi, and Ina Schaefer. 2018. A classification of product sampling
for software product lines. In Proceedings of the 22nd International Systems and
Software Product Line Conference-Volume 1. 1ś13.
[56] Alexander von Rhein, Jörg Liebig, Andreas Janker, Christian Kästner, and Sven
Apel. 2018. Variability-Aware Static Analysis at Scale: An Empirical Study. ACM
Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology 27, 4 (2018), Article No.
18. https://doi.org/10.1145/3280986
[57] Martin Walch, Rouven Walter, and Wolfgang Küchlin. 2015. Formal analysis
of the Linux kernel configuration with SAT solving. In Configuration Workshop.
131ś138.
[58] Eric Walkingshaw, Christian Kästner, Martin Erwig, Sven Apel, and Eric Bodden.
2014. Variational Data Structures: Exploring Tradeoffs in Computing with Variability. In Proceedings of the 2014 ACM International Symposium on New Ideas,
New Paradigms, and Reflections on Programming & Software (Portland, Oregon,
USA) (Onward! 2014). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA,
213ś226. https://doi.org/10.1145/2661136.2661143
[59] Aaron Weiss, Arjun Guha, and Yuriy Brun. 2017. Tortoise: Interactive System
Configuration Repair. In Proceedings of the 32nd IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software Engineering (Urbana-Champaign, IL, USA) (ASE
2017). IEEE Press, 625ś636.
[60] Chengyuan Wen, Yaxuan Zhang, Xiao He, and Na Meng. 2020. Inferring and
Applying Def-Use like Configuration Couplings in Deployment Descriptors. In
Proceedings of the 35th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software
Engineering (Virtual Event, Australia) (ASE ’20). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 672ś683. https://doi.org/10.1145/3324884.3416577
[61] Christoph Zengler and Wolfgang Küchlin. 2010. Encoding the Linux kernel configuration in propositional logic. In Proceedings of the 19th European Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (ECAI 2010) Workshop on Configuration, Vol. 2010. 51ś56.

905

